6 

in dropsical affections, as has hitherto been the practice, the patient 
is subjected to the narcotic influence of the sparteine, as well as to 
the diuretic effects of the scoparine, a result which in general is not 
likely to be desirable. The author does not, however, think it is at 
all necessary to employ chemically pure scoparine for medical pur* 
poses. If a decoction of broom be evaporated to dryness on the 
water-bath, then treated with a little dilute hydrochloric acid, the 
mixture thrown upon a filter and washed w^ith a small quantity of 
cold water, almost the whole of the sparteine will be removed, and 
the dark green gelatinous mass remaining on the filter will be found 
to possess the diuretic without the narcotic properties of the plant. 



December 19, 1850. 
SIR BENJAMIN C. BRODIE, Bart., Vice-President, in the Chair. 
Captain Lefroy, R.A., was admitted into the Society. 

The following communication received from Professor Hermann 
Schlagintweit was read : — 

" Results of Observations on the Distribution of Temperature in 
the Alps." 

1. The greatest irregularities and the most considerable local in- 
flexions of isothermals are observed at the lower heights. 

2. Generally speaking, the depression of temperature is also very 
sensible at stations in the Alps when proceeding from south to north ; 
and the eastern parts are colder than the western. One degree of 
latitude produces in the plain of Lombardy a difference of tem- 
perature amounting to 0°'7 C. In the interior parts of the Alps the 
difference is 0°-5 to 0°-6 C. 

3. If we consider the isothermal lines on a longitudinal profile of 
the Alps, we find that their forms show some connexion with the 
mean elevation of the different parts of the Alps. The isothermals 
rise where the mean elevation is greater ; they sink at the borders 
and on smaller groups. This convexity of the isothermal lines in the 
centre of the Alps is still more considerable if we represent by them 
the temperature of the earth, since the latter is still more intimately 
connected with the mass of the mountains, with the insulation and 
radiation of the rocky substance ; whilst for the temperature of the 
air, differences of that kind are more eliminated by its mobility. 

4. The vertical distances of two isothermals are the greatest near 
the base of the Alps, attain afterwards a minimum, and become in 
the higher parts again a little greater. The position of the minimum 
takes place in the Northern Alps and the group of the St. Gothard 
at nearly 6000 French feet ; in the central parts at nearly 7000 ; for 
the group of Mont Blanc it seems to be at a still greater elevation. 

5. The height corresponding to a depression of temperature of 



1° C. is in the mean 540 F. feet = 90 toises= 166 metres, if we 
compare the lowest stations of continued observation with the 
highest stations ; but if we consider the temperatui'e of the highest 
summits^ the height becomes rather less (510 feet for the Central 
Alps). 

6. The mean temperature of the air seems to be, for the highest 
summits, from — 13° to •— 15° C. 

7. At the greater elevations the temperature of single months is 
generally altered in this manner: — The temperatures of February 
and January, of August and July, differ less from each other than 
they do at lower stations. 

8. The influence of the general form of the surface on the tem- 
perature is particularly evident when we consider the mean tempera- 
ture of the months. The valleys during the winter are in general 
colder than the mountains, the cold air sinking down and being ac- 
cumulated in them ; during the summer they are comparatively 
warmer, the heat being reflected and radiated by the insulated masses 
near them, and circulation produced, especially in the horizontal 
direction : their climate is therefore subject to greater extremes, 
though in the annual mean it scarcely differs from the Alps in general. 
The declivities during the winter are comparatively warmer, since the 
air near the surface, after sinking down in the valleys, is replaced 
readily by less cold strata. During the summer, particularly in 
southern exposures, and if the relative height above the bottom of 
the valley is not great, they are also a little warmer, since then 
they can partially be reached by the ascending current of air. But 
this increase of temperature being smaller than that of winter, these 
situations have a more constant climate than the valleys. The mean 
temperature of the year on declivities, particularly with southern 
exposures, is therefore a little higher than the mean of the Alps in 
general. 

9. Summits and declivities, with an exposure to north and to north- 
east, show also the character of a constant climate ; but the tem- 
perature of summer is much lower, and consequently the annual 
mean is also sensibly depressed. 

10. The depression of temperature with elevation is greater in 
summer than in winter, amounting for example to 1° C. for MO feet 
in July, and for 710 feet in January. The cause of this is, that in 
the lower parts of the mountains the differences between single 
months are greater than in the higher parts. 

11. The elevation of the point, near which on a vertical line the 
depression of temperature is the greatest, is a different one in every 
month. It is the highest, when the Alps are covered with snow, in 
December and January ; from March to September this point is 
generally found near the limit of snow ; in October and November 
it lies below the snow-line. 

12. The height of the snowline in the months does not coincide 
always with the same isothermal. In January the snow-line and 
the isothermal of O'^ are both nearly on the base of the Alps ; but 
from this time to July and August, the isothermal of zero moves 



8 

quicker upwards than the snow-line, and from August to January 
quicker downwards. The snow-line therefore in the first period 
coincides with isothermals warmer than 0° C. ; in July it is even 
at -f-5'^ C. The snow-line, in the usual sense, that is to say its 
highest limits in summer, is, at the mean temperature of the year, 
-4^ C. 

13. Over large masses of snow^ and glaciers there is remarked, 
particularly on fine days, a descending current of air (glacier-wind)j 
which has a great influence on the general depression of temperature 
near the limits of snow. 

14. Tiie absolute extremes of cold on single days are at the lower 
stations sometimes so great, that they are comparatively but little 
surpassed by those on the higher points. But the differences be- 
tween the higher and lower part are much greater if we consider 
the maxima of heat. The absolute maxima ssem scarcely ever to 
exceed 5" or 6° C. on the highest summits of the Alps. On all days 
the decrease of temperature is greater at the time of the maximum 
than at the minimum. 

15. Compared therefore to the temperature of high latitudes, the 
summits of the Alps correspond nearly to 70° N. Lat. But the cli- 
mate of the highest elevations on the Alps is much less severe than 
that of Northern Asia, and is more constant than that of Polar 
America. Their minima of winter are much surpassed by nearly all 
stations in northern latitudes ; but the maxima of summer are 
colder than those of nearly all points on high latitudes at little ele- 
vation above the sea. 

A paper was also in part read, entitled " On the Exogenous Pro- 
cesses of the Vertebrae." Bv Professor Owen, F.R.S. &c. Received 
November 8, 1 850. 

The Society then adjourned over the Christmas holidays, to meet 
again on the 9th of January, 1851. 



January 9, 1851. 
Lieut.-Col. SABINE, R.A, V.P. and Treasurer in the Chair. 

The reading of Prof. Owen's paper ^' On the Exogenous Processes 
of Vertebrae" was resumed and concluded. 

The author commences by a definition of these as contradistin- 
guished from the autogenous parts or ' elements' of a vertebra, and 
exemplifies them by instances from Human and Comparative Ana- 
tomy, which show the necessity of a distinct substantive term for 
each of such parts and processes. The terms proposed are as 
follows : — 



