192 

with the Hydrographer's Office of the United States, so that the 
united labours of the two greatest naval and commercial nations of 
the world may be combined, with the least practicable; delay, in 
promoting the interests of navigation. 

The President and Council refer to the documents which have 
been submitted to them, and more especially to the " Explanations 
and Sailing Directions to accompany wind and current charts" pre- 
pared by Lieutenant Maury, for a more detailed account of this 
system of cooperative observations, and of the grounds upon which 
they have ventured to make the preceding recommendations. 

(Signed) S. Hunter Christie, Sec, R.S. 

H. U. Addingtoriy Esq. 

3. "Second Appendix to a paper entitled * Discovery that the 
Veins of the Bat's Wing (which are furnished with valves) are en- 
dowed with rythmical contractility.' " By T. Wharton Jones, Esq., 
RR.S. 3cc. 

The author states that, from a microscopical examination of the 
blood-vessels and circulation in the ears of the long- eared bat, he 
has ascertained that, different from what he had discovered to be the 
case in the wings, the veins of the ears are unfurnished with valves, 
and are not endowed with rythmical contractility, and that the 
onward flow of blood in them is consequently uniform. 

4. A paper was in part read, entitled, "Upon the Morphology 
of the Cephalous Mollusca, as illustrated by the anatomy of certain 
Heteropoda and Pteropoda." By Thomas Huxley, Esq., F.R.S. 
Received March 18, 1852. 



May 27, 1852. 

The EARL OF ROSSE, President, in the Chair. 

The reading of Mr. Pluxley's paper, ** Upon the Morphology of 
the Cephalous Mollusca, as illustrated by the Anatomy of certain 
Heteropoda and Pteropoda," was resumed and concluded. 

In the present memoir the author endeavours to determine, upon 
anatpmical and embryological grounds, the true homologies of the 
different organs of the Cephalous Mollusca, and thence to arrive at 
some idea of the archetypal form, as definite modifications of which 
the existing molluscous forms may be considered to have arisen. 

The Pelagic Heteropoda and Pteropoda, from their small size and 
extreme transparancy, are peculiarly favourable subjects for the ana- 
tomical part of this investigation, and it is from a detailed examina- 
tion of those systems of organs which are of importance for the pur- 
pose that the author deduces the following conclusions : — 

1. In the Heteropoda the intestine is bent towards the dorsal or 
h(tmal side in consequence of the development behind the anus of 
the visceral " hernia," which is therefore called a post-abdomen. 



193 

2. In the Heterdpoda, the " foot/' in its most perfect condition, 
eonsists of three portions, a. propodium, mesopodium and metapodium, 

3. The Heteropoda are more or less prosobranchiate, the degree 
depending upon the amount of development of the post-abdomen* 

4. In the Pteropoda the intestine is bent towayds the ventral or 
neural side, in consequence of the, development of the visceral ** her- 
nia 'V in front of the anus. It is therefore called an «^e^ome/«. 

5. In the Pteropoda, the foot, besides the parts mentioned above, 
possesses an additional appendage, the epipodium, which forms the 
expanded wing characteristic of the group, 

6. The Pteropoda are opisthobranchiate, prosobranchiate, or in- 
termediate in character, according to the degree of development of 
the abdomen. 

The M^ter op oda mid Pteropoda, then, may be considered to reprer 
sent two opposite phases of the modification of the molluscous; 
archetype. 

In the second part of the paper, the author endeavours, by care- 
fully collating the known facts of the development of the Mollusca, 
to ascertain («) the primary form of all cephalous Mollusca, and (^) 
the mode in which, in the course of development, this embryonic 
form becomes metamorphosed into the adult form ; in order, if pos- 
sible, to account, on the safe basis of ascertained morphological laws, 
for the peculiar modifications of structure which have been found, 
anatomically, to obtain among the Heteropoda and Pteropoda. 

He finds thatit is possible not only to deduce the structure of the 
Heteropoda and Pteropoda from a simple and symmetrical archetype 
by such morphological laws, but that all the cephalous Mollusca 
fall under one or other of the great types of which these have beeni 
taken as exemplifications. 

After a discussion of the various theories of the homology of the 
organs of cephalous Mollusca proposed by Loven, Leuckart, &c., the 
following general conclusions are set forth : — 

1. The cephalous Mollusca are ail organized after the same fun- 
damental form or archetype. 

2. The arrangement of the systems of organs within this arche- 
type is essentially the same as in the Vertebrata and Annulosa ; that 
is to say, supposing the digestive system to form the axis of the body, 
the nervous centre lies on one side of that axis; the blood-vascular 
centre upon the opposite; and furthermore, the archetype is sym- 
metrical with regard to a longitudinal vertical plane, passing through 
these three. 

3. The molluscous archetype differs from the vertebrate in the 
circumstance — 1, that the mouth opens upon the neural surface ; 2, 
that the embryo commences its development upon the hsemal side. 

It differs from the articulate archetype in the latter circumstance, 
and from both in the fact, that the proper appendicular system (re- 
presented by the epipodium) is almost rudimentary, and that the 
locomotive function is mainly performed by a development of the 
neural surface. 

4. The process of concentration and fusion of parts by which the 



194 

principal modifications are produced among the Vertebrata and Arti- 
culate, seems almost iabsent in the MoUusea; the changes among 
them being produced by an asymmetrical development of the prima- 
rily symmetrical archetype, a process comparatively rare among the 
Articulata and Vertebrata. 

5. The part thxis asymmetrically developed is invariably a portion 
of the h^mal surfacie, and may be called an abdomen ov w posUdbdo- 
me?2, according as it is placed before or behind the anus. 

6. The ihtestine is found to be bent in tviro directions 'among the 
Mollusca, hsemad or neurad, and these flexures correspond! with the 
development of a post-abdomen or abdomen, respectively; 

7. The process of development demonstrates that the Tectibran. 
chiata, Nudibranchiata and Pectinibranchiata (in part at least!) belong 
to the former division, and that the Oephalopoda and Pulmonata 
belong to the latter. 

8. Anatomical evidence shovsrs that the Heteropoda have a hsemal 
flexure of the intestine, the Pteropoda a neural flexure;- and it is 
almost certain that when their development is traced, the former will 
be found to have a post-abdomen, the latter an abdomen ; there will 
then be tvsro great divisions of the cephalous mollusca. 

a. Those which develope an abdomen j-~C7ep^<3^/opoc?a/ Pi^erbpo<^a, 
Pulmonata, 

5. Those which develope a post-abdomen i-^Heteropoda, Pectini^ 
branchiatay Teetibt^anchiata; Nudibr^^^ 

9. Prbsobranchibm arid 0*pisthobranchism may occur as secondary 
results of either course of development * 

10. The principal nervous centres are similar in number and posi- 
tion throughout, and differ only in their arrangement and degrees of 
concentration. The amount of the latter does not correspond? with 
the complexity of organization of the mollusk; but rather the re- 
verse. 

11. The organization of the vascular system is eqsually uniform ; 
its completeness or incompleteness is no mark of complexity or sim- 
plicity of the rest of the organization. 

12. The cephalous Mollusca are characterized by the possession of 
a peculiar organ, the dentigerous " tongue,'^ whose mode of action 
resembles that of a chain-saw. 

13. The locomotive apparatus, when fully developed, consists of 
four parts, the propodium, mesopodium, metapodium and epipodium. 
These parts are least modified in such moUusks as Atlanta or Pneu- 
modeimon; most altered and disguised in such as Cleodora or Oc- 
topus. 

14. The term^* mantle" should be confined to the surface of the 
abdomen or post-abdomen, and to the prolonged edges of that surface. 

15. It is of great importance to recoilect that the ** shells" are 
probably not homologous Organs in all the difl^erent forms of mollusks. 

The shells of Sepia, Spirula(?), Limax,Clausilia and Helix are 
developed in the thickness of the mantle. 

The shells of Nautilus (?), Pectinibranchiata, &c., are developed 
from the surface of the mantle by a qfuite distinct process. 



195 

Certain curiou s differences apf ear to follow the exterBality' or in- 
ternality. of the shell. 

An external shell in a moUusk with a hgemal flexure, ^i ^. Atlanta, 
has its polumellar axis Se^oiM^ the aperture. 

An external shell in a moUusk with a neural llexure> ^. ^, Nautilus, 
has its columellar axis a^oi?^ the aperture 

An internal shell in a mollusk with a neural flexure, has its colu- 
mellar axis helow the aperture, e. g. Spirula, Glausilia, Helix. 

In the course of the memoir tjhe author incidentaily. introduces a 
number of new, and,, as he believes, important facts, with regard to 
the nervous, circulatory and urinary systems ; and describes at 
length the mechanism of th^? ^' tongue "and an organ similar to the 
"crystalline style" of bivalves, found in the Strombidaei 

The following papers were also read :— 

I, " On the Change of; Refrangibility of Light." By George G. 
Stokes, Esq., M.A-^ F.E.S., Lucasian Pr^ofessor of Mathematics, 
Cambridge . Recjeived May 1 1 , 1 85 2 . 

The author was led into the ;r^sGarches detailed in this paper by 
considering 1 a very singular phenomenon ,wh|ph . ^W] John Herschel 
had discovered in the case of a weak solution of sulphate of quinine, 
and various other salts of the saiqae alkatoid.: This fluid appears 
colourless and transparent, like water^ when viewed by transmitted 
light, but.exhibits , in jcertaipi. aspects a peculiar blue jeolouy,; Sir 
John Herschel found that wherii the fluid was illuminated by a beam 
of ordinary daylight, the blue light v^as produced only throughout a 
v^ry thin stratum of fluid ad|acent to the surface by which the light 
entered. It was unpolarized* It passed fireely through npny inches 
of. the fluid. The incident beam,; after having passed through the 
stratum frqmi which the, blue light came, was not sensibly enfeebled 
nor ;cqloured> but yet it had: lost the power of producing the usual 
blue colour when admitted into a solution of sulphate of quinine. A 
bekm of light modified in this mysterious manner was called by 
Sir John Herschel epipoUsedr 

Several years before Sir David Brewster had discovered in the 
case of an alcoholic solution of the green colouring matter of leaves 
a very remarkable phenomenon, which he has designated as m?er?2a/ 
dispersion. On admitting into this fluid a beam of sunlight con^ 
densed by a lens, he was surprised by finding the path of the rays 
within the fluid marked by a bright light of a blood- red colour, 
strangely contrasting with the beautiful green of the fluid itself when 
seen in moderate thickness. Sir Davi(i afterwards observed the 
same phenomenon in various vegetable solutions and essential oils, 
and in some solids. He conceived it to be due to coloured particles 
held in suspension. But there was one circumstance attending the 
phenomenon which seemed very difficult of explanation on such 
a supposition, namely, that the whole or a great part of the dispersed 
beam was unpolarized, whereas a beam reflected from suspended 



